DS 298: Work Assignment - 2
Due March 14, 2026
The goal of this work is to analyze the errors E in the Algorithms (1) and
(2) presented in the class to evaluate the top-k singular value components using
column sampling and random projections respectively, for various values n in
matrix dimensions and number of singular components k, in each case of the
two different classes of matrices described.
Pk (σ′ −σ )2
∥A−U U T A∥2
Let relative errors E1 = 1 ikσ2i and E2 = Pn σ2 F − 1, where σi
k+1

i

i

and σi′ are the input and the estimated singular values respectively as ordered
sets, and U represents the matrix of estimated k left singular vectors. Let An×n
be considered with values of n (x-axis in plots) as 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600.
The relative errors are to be traced (in the y-axis) for three different values of
k = log2 n, (log2 n)2 , n5 rounded to the nearest integer in a single plot. E1 and
E2 can be traced in two separate plots. The number of columns sampled in
algorithm (1) can be fixed as c = 2k. Average over 10 runs of the algorithms
for each data point in the plot. These plots, two each for algorithms (1) and
(2), are to be further replicated for the two matrix classes I and II.
The trial matrices are to be generated using the singular value decomposition
10(k−1)
U ΣV T . The singular values given by Σkk should be fixed as i) e− n
for
Class-I matrices, and ii) as n−k+1
for
Class-II
matrices.
The
algorithm
for
n
generating the trial matrices is briefly described below.
Algorithm: Generation of random trial matrices of a class
Inputs : Σ ∈ Rn×n ; diagonal matrix of singular values.
Outputs : A ∈ Rn×n ; trial matrix.
Initialize : M1 ←− randn[n, n] and M2 ←− randn[n, n]; Initialize two random
matrices.
Generate singular vectors : Q1 R1 ←− M1 and Q2 R2 ←− M2 ; QR
factorization of the two matrices.
Build trial matrices : A ←− Q1 ΣQT2 ; generate test matrix of a given
singular value distribution.

Note : Submit the responses with the plots, and the codes, as separate files
all zipped into a single folder identified by your name in full, and upload it on
the MS-Teams channel for DS 298.

1

